# Pair Programming in the Classroom

In IT companies today, Agile methodology is one of the most popular and widely
used software development methodologies — especially where the teams need to
deliver working software quickly, collaboratively, and adaptively. **Pair
programming** is a core practice in Extreme Programming (XP), which is one
of the Agile methodologies.

It is a collaborative software development technique where two developers work
together at one computer. One developer, called the **driver**, writes the code
and focuses on syntax, while the other developer, called the **navigator**,
reviews each line of code as it is typed, looks out for mistakes, asks
questions, and suggests improvements. The two developers switch roles
frequently.

It is very easy to transfer this practice from IT companies to high school
computer classrooms. In the classroom, two students share one computer to solve
a programming task together. One student types the code, while the other checks
the code, gives suggestions, and thinks about the next steps. After each
subtask, they switch roles. Pair programming helps students learn by working
together, practicing teamwork, sharing ideas, and seeing different ways to
solve the same problems.

## Benefits for Students

- **Peer Learning:** Students learn from each other. Beginners benefit from
working with more experienced classmates, and everyone strengthens their
understanding by explaining their thought process. Also, through shared
knowledge the problem-solving will be faster.
- **Better Solution Quality:** A second pair of eyes helps catch errors early.
Immediate feedback often leads to better solutions and cleaner code.
- **Improved Engagement:** Pair work keeps both students active and focused.
Communicating ideas helps deepen understanding and builds teamwork skills.

## Challenges in the Classroom

- **Personality Clashes:** Differences in communication style or skill level
can lead to frustration. Students must learn to work respectfully, even when
they disagree.
- **Uneven Participation:** One student may try to take over. Teachers must
supervise regular role switching to ensure both students are equally involved.
- **Fatigue:** Long sessions can be mentally demanding. Well-scoped tasks help
maintain focus and energy.

Best pair programming practices recommend switching roles after each subtask,
to keep both students engaged. Students should communicate out loud, openly and
respectfully, explaining what they’re doing or thinking. If both students are
stuck they should ask for teacher’s help — that is also the part of learning!
